[SPIR-V][DOC] Add SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints extension spec (#1593)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/SPIRV/SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints.asciidoc

SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints
============================

Name Strings
------------

SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints

Contact
-------

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers

Contributors
------------

- Dmitry Sidorov, Intel
- Alexey Sachkov, Intel
- Alexey Sotkin, Intel
- Ben Ashbaugh, Intel

Notice
------

Copyright (c) 2020 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Status
------

Working Draft

This is a preview extension specification, intended to provide early access to a
feature for review and community feedback. When the feature matures, this
specification may be released as a formal extension.

Because the interfaces defined by this specification are not final and are
subject to change they are not intended to be used by shipping software
products.

Version
-------

[width="40%",cols="25,25"]
|========================================

> | Last Modified Date | 2020-04-27

Reviewer: Please keep it up to date

| Revision           | E
|========================================

Dependencies
------------

This extension is written against the SPIR-V Specification,
Version 1.5 Revision 2.

This extension requires SPIR-V 1.0.

Overview
--------

> This extension adds *AssumeTrueINTEL* and *OpExpectINTEL* instructions that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extension adds *OpAssumeTrueINTEL* and *OpExpectINTEL* instructions that are
```

> This extension adds *AssumeTrueINTEL* and *OpExpectINTEL* instructions that are
> appropriately mapped on ‘llvm.assume’ and ‘llvm.expect’ intrinsics. That is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extension adds *OpAssumeTrueINTEL* and *OpExpectINTEL* instructions which are
mapped to ‘llvm.assume’ and ‘llvm.expect’ intrinsics respectively. That is
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure about "to"

required to save optimization hints through LLVM IR to SPIR-V transformation.

Extension Name
--------------

To use this extension within a SPIR-V module, the following *OpExtension* must
be present in the module:

----
OpExtension "SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints"
----

New Capabilities
----------------
This extension introduces a new capability:

----
OptimizationHintsINTEL
----

New Instructions
----------------
Instructions added under the *OptimizationHintsINTEL* capability:

----

> ExpectINTEL
> AssumeTrueINTEL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpExpectINTEL
OpAssumeTrueINTEL
```

----

Token Number Assignments
------------------------
[width="45%",cols="30,15"]
|===============================
| OptimizationHintsINTEL | 5629

> | AssumeTrueINTEL        | 5630

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| OpAssumeTrueINTEL        | 5630
```

| OpExpectINTEL          | 5631
|===============================

Modifications to the SPIR-V Specification, Version 1.5
------------------------------------------------------

Capabilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Modify Section 3.31, "Capability", adding these rows to the Capability table:

--
[options="header"]
|====
2+^| Capability ^| Depends On
| 5629 | *OptimizationHintsINTEL* +

> Allow to use AssumeTrueINTEL and ExpectINTEL instructions |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allow to use *OpAssumeTrueINTEL* and *OpExpectINTEL* instructions |
```

|====
--

Instructions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In section 3.32.1, Miscellaneous Instructions, add a new instruction:

[cols="3", width="100%"]
|=====
2+^|*OpAssumeTrueINTEL* +
The instruction allows the optimizer to assume that the provided _Condition_ is

> always true whenever the control flow reaches the instruction call. If the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
always true whenever the control flow reaches the instruction. If the
```

_Condition_ is violated during execution, the behavior is undefined.

> The type of _Condition_ shall be _Boolean_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type of _Condition_ must be _Boolean_.
```

Author: I disagree. Usually in specification/requirement docs `shall` has a power of `must`, so it's a strong requirement.

Reviewer: Current version of the [SPIRV spec](https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir-v/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html) contains:
 * "shall" 0 times
 * "must" 1390 times

Author: Applied. If you don't mind I would leave the revision version unchanged :)

----
OptimizationHintsINTEL
----

New Instructions
----------------
Instructions added under the *OptimizationHintsINTEL* capability:

----
OpExpectINTEL
OpAssumeTrueINTEL
----

Token Number Assignments
------------------------
[width="45%",cols="30,15"]
|===============================
| OptimizationHintsINTEL | 5629
| OpAssumeTrueINTEL      | 5630
| OpExpectINTEL          | 5631
|===============================

Modifications to the SPIR-V Specification, Version 1.5
------------------------------------------------------

Capabilities
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Modify Section 3.31, "Capability", adding these rows to the Capability table:

--
[options="header"]
|====
2+^| Capability ^| Depends On
| 5629 | *OptimizationHintsINTEL* +
Allow to use OpAssumeTrueINTEL and OpExpectINTEL instructions |
|====
--

Instructions
~~~~~~~~~~~~

In section 3.32.1, Miscellaneous Instructions, add a new instruction:

[cols="3", width="100%"]
|=====
2+^|*OpAssumeTrueINTEL* +
The instruction allows the optimizer to assume that the provided _Condition_ is
always true whenever the control flow reaches the instruction. If the
_Condition_ is violated during execution, the behavior is undefined.

> The type of _Condition_ must be _Boolean_.

Reviewer 2: Must _Condition_ be a scalar, or may it be a vector of _Boolean type_ also?

Author: It shall be scalar. Added.

| Capability:
*OptimizationHintsINTEL*

| 2 | 5630 | Condition <id>
|=====

[cols="6", width="100%"]
|=====
5+^|*OpExpectINTEL* +

Provides information for optimizers that the most probable value of _Value_ is
_ExpectedValue_. This instruction can be safely replaced with an entity

> referenced by _Value_.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to strengthen this description somewhat.  Is the intent that **OpExpectINTEL** behaves the same as **OpCopyObject** except that it also provides information about the most probable value of _Value_?

Author: > Is the intent that OpExpectINTEL behaves the same as OpCopyObject except that it also provides information about the most probable value of Value?

Yes, but OpExpectINTEL is more strict about result type.

Reviewer 2: I still don't think this is sufficiently descriptive, and there is a typo now (`entityi`).

How about something like:

> This instruction behaves the same as *OpCopyObject* by making a copy of _Value_,
except it also provides information to the optimizer that the most probable
value of _Value_ is _ExpectedValue_.
>
> _Result Type_ must be a scalar or vector of _integer type_ or _Boolean type_.
> 
> The type of _Value_ and _ExpectedValue_ must be the same as _Result Type_.

SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints
============================

Name Strings
------------

SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints

Contact
-------

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Headers

Contributors
------------

- Dmitry Sidorov, Intel
- Alexey Sachkov, Intel
- Alexey Sotkin, Intel
- Ben Ashbaugh, Intel

Notice
------

Copyright (c) 2020 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Status
------

Working Draft

This is a preview extension specification, intended to provide early access to a
feature for review and community feedback. When the feature matures, this
specification may be released as a formal extension.

Because the interfaces defined by this specification are not final and are
subject to change they are not intended to be used by shipping software
products.

Version
-------

[width="40%",cols="25,25"]
|========================================
| Last Modified Date | 2020-04-27
| Revision           | E
|========================================

Dependencies
------------

This extension is written against the SPIR-V Specification,
Version 1.5 Revision 2.

This extension requires SPIR-V 1.0.

Overview
--------

> This extension adds a decoration *AssumeTrueINTEL* and an instruction

Reviewer 3: `assume` is not a decoration anymore

*OpExpectINTEL* that are appropriately mapped on ‘llvm.assume’ and ‘llvm.expect’
intrinsics. That is required to save optimization hints through LLVM IR to
SPIR-V transformation.

Extension Name
--------------

To use this extension within a SPIR-V module, the following *OpExtension* must
be present in the module:

----
OpExtension "SPV_INTEL_optimization_hints"
----

New Capabilities
----------------
This extension introduces a new capability:

----
OptimizationHintsINTEL
----

New Instructions
----------------
Instructions added under the *OptimizationHintsINTEL* capability:

----
ExpectINTEL
----

New Decorations
---------------
Decorations added under the *OptimizationHintsINTEL* capability:

----

> AssumeTrueINTEL

Reviewer 3: This is not a decoration anymore
